INDEPENDENT ADVERSARIAL REVIEW: IMPLEMENTATION AND RESPONSE THEORY
4 October 2026. Software correctness review; no benchmark, research dataset,
model download, or performance measurement was conducted by this reviewer.

Scope
-----
Read AGENTS.md, RESUME.md, project status/context, algorithm/numerical contracts,
and the implementations exact_core.py, sparse_repair.py, work_scheduler.py,
response_moments.py, response_certificate.py, repair_service.py, and
transformer_backend.py. Independently checked response_moments.txt, including
its mixed-derivative and coefficient-storage arguments. This is a mathematical
and source review with executable contract fixtures, not a formal verification
or an audit against arbitrary hostile Python code or storage.

Concrete issue found and resolved
--------------------------------
RepairService initially allowed reassignment of job/evaluator/reference_evaluator
after its manifest and ancestor closure were cached. A caller could change
normalization, ridge, or the executable while retaining the old manifest.
Reported this to the author. The service is now a frozen dataclass, and the
ancestor map is a read-only MappingProxyType. An independent regression test
checks that changing normalization via service.job, replacing the evaluator,
or mutating the ancestor map is rejected.

Also flagged the analogous decoder configuration hazard. The backend author
had already sealed all ordinary attribute assignment and made configuration,
weights and block maps immutable; this was checked in source and regression
tests. These measures prevent ordinary accidental configuration drift. They
do not make Python objects secure against arbitrary object.__setattr__, native
memory modification, monkey-patching, or dishonest trusted callbacks.

Algorithmic findings
--------------------
1. Exact local core: reverse LDL signs, conditional-input recurrence,
   pre-decision energy, nearest-lower ties, saturation, zero-radius ties and
   shape-certificate squared comparisons are consistent. The output explicitly
   marks the supplied spectral premise as unverified by this local module.

2. Sparse repair: the injection sign is positive B'_(i,h)*(q'_h-q_h), and the
   displacement is minus (B'-B)*(w-q). Exact fallback uses the true supplied B'
   and already repaired coordinates. The implementation allows a proved
   interval to select a changed cell and then injects that change downstream.
   Inclusive upper/exclusive lower cell semantics are handled correctly. By
   default the old trace is checked; omitted trace/envelope validation remains
   visibly conditional in result flags. Target-factor provenance is not proved.

3. Service prefix correctness: stages are visited in fixed dependency order;
   each evaluator receives only its full transitive ancestor closure. Ancestor
   outputs are immutable. The service never installs an unaccepted candidate
   into the ancestor prefix. Unknown bounds cause retained replay. Each replay
   removes a previously unresolved group, so finite exact fallback exists.

4. Proposal correctness: an optional prefix-dependent raw surrogate Gram must
   be exactly symmetric PSD; the rational Schur/zero-pivot test is sound. Its
   witness binds both the original reference context and the proposal digest.
   Feature-error conversion uses the proposal trace, and replay subtracts that
   proposal before adding the true Gram. Thus the ridge-based relative bound
   remains valid after arbitrary group replacement. The source verifies binding
   and arithmetic, not truth of an arbitrary provider's mathematical premise.

5. Repeated state: service-origin reference moments are exact additive functions
   of each record under a fixed corpus-independent reference. Deletion checks
   membership, uniqueness and content digest, regenerates removed contributions,
   and drops empty groups. Metadata/group order is canonical. Original state is
   not mutated. Fresh and repair serialize the same logical retained-only state.
   Fixed positive normalization and ridge are part of the manifest. This is not
   an implementation of dynamic normalization, activation ordering, fitted
   scales, relative damping, or other data-dependent quantizer branches.

6. Complete decoder: embedding/position addition, pre-LayerNorm, causal multihead
   attention, output projection, residual, second norm, GELU/up/down MLP,
   residual, final norm and LM head are present. Stage features are the inputs
   to the four quantized matrices per block. All earlier stages are conservative
   dependencies. The backend binds a specific finite CPU program and exports
   exact dyadic feature values; it does not claim pretrained-package equivalence
   or cross-platform bitwise identity. Its actual shortcut is finite-parameter
   identity with the independent base reference. Changed finite ancestors are
   UNKNOWN and replay; no nontrivial finite-kernel response proof is implemented.

7. Response moments: oriented cross-moment contraction and exact deletion are
   correct. Intrinsic record-payload digests prevent accidental wrong-contribution
   subtraction. These digests do not prove that original jets match a neural
   derivative. The code stores full oriented cross matrices and therefore uses
   a constant-factor larger representation than the theory's minimal symmetric
   coefficient/triangular-entry representation.

8. Response certificate: descriptor contraction includes all squared-error cross
   terms. The dyadic square-root enclosure is outward by exact integer arithmetic.
   The derived bound is 2*upper_sqrt(z2*e2)+e2 with correct normalization. IDs,
   source bindings and descriptor shape are checked. Descriptor/jet/curvature/
   finite-execution/domain fidelity remains explicitly unverified by this module.

9. Scheduler: least normalized accumulated work gives the stated packet-lag
   weighted-race bound under the declared bounded cooperative-packet contract.
   Cancellation and commit are separate actual charged values. A step reporting
   too-large work cannot undo already executed work, which the module discloses.
   Exceptions do not commit a returned candidate; caller-owned failure cleanup
   is not silently covered. This is not a GPU preemption or wall-clock theorem,
   and the scheduler is a separate primitive, not a measured full-service race.

Independent response-theory review
----------------------------------
Checked the affine-jet quadratic Gram expansion, additive deletion closure,
Taylor integral remainder with FULL bilinear coefficient Hessian, out-of-chart
residual, numerical and jet-approximation terms. The descriptor outer-product
sum correctly preserves mixed squared-error terms. The response transport and
shape certificate compose under the new certified prefix. The stated local
square-root-in-margin radius follows by solving 2e+e^2 < eta_tau. It requires
the stated residual/numerical conditions; it is not implied by few deletions.

Checked affine and matrix-product mixed derivative terms; the conservative
softmax Hessian bound 3/2; the LayerNorm Hessian bound
6*||gamma||_infinity/(sqrt(n)*s_min^2); and the safe GELU constants. These apply
to ideal smooth nodes with separately certified numerical errors. They may be
too loose in real models, and the current decoder supplies no such nonzero
transport provider.

The coefficient-storage proof is valid for its exact polynomial-Gram query
interface: independent rank-one symmetric matrices tensor independent squares
of affine polynomials; B choices per coefficient produce B^(K*M) distinguishable
query functions. The higher-order squares-spanning argument also checks out.
It is not a lower bound for one model output, arbitrary transformer repair,
unbounded-size machine words, or algorithms allowed missing record information.

Independent executable checks
-----------------------------
Added tests/test_adversarial_sparse_v3.py (3 tests):
- several changed target factors compared against the independent constrained
  Gaussian-solve quantizer, with exact fallback and checked-envelope paths;
- stale old trace rejection;
- dishonest envelope rejection in verified mode and visible conditional status
  in the explicit trusted-envelope mode.

Added tests/test_adversarial_service_v3.py (initially 6 tests; 7 after the signed-bound extension below):
- a two-stage fixture whose FIRST installed stage changes after deletion,
  compared with an independently reconstructed feature formula and constrained
  Gaussian solves, and with fresh canonical bytes;
- repeated, combined, empty-request and empty-retained construction semantics;
- tampering with each of all eight witness binding fields;
- mismatched provider identity, negative/float/bool bounds and unsupported tuples;
- duplicate/absent/wrong-content deletions, foreign manifests and wrong retained
  source contents;
- immutable configuration regression for the stale-manifest issue above.

Final reviewer-run command at this checkpoint:
  python -m unittest discover -s tests -v
Result: 49 tests passed. Later author tests may increase this count; this note
does not pre-certify code or tests added after the review. Reported runtimes are
deliberately omitted because these are correctness fixtures, not a benchmark.

Claim boundary
--------------
No remaining correctness defect was found within the stated trusted-program,
trusted-provider and service-origin/authenticated-state contracts of the reviewed
code. This statement is narrower than production readiness or formal proof.
There is still no nontrivial certified transformer response provider, no trained
checkpoint adapter validation, no practical coverage evidence, and no reliable
full-model latency speedup. The direct fresh service is a correctness comparator;
it is not asserted to be the fastest equally indexed performance baseline.
Logical omission of deleted entries is not physical secure erasure of Python
or caller copies. Novelty priority and empirical significance require their own
evidence; passing these tests establishes neither.

ADDENDUM: COMPACT LINEAR RESPONSE, SIGNED BOUNDS AND SERVICE ADAPTER
----------------------------------------------------------------
Subsequently reviewed linear_gram_response.txt, src/linear_response.py, both
tiers in src/response_service_adapter.py and the signed-bound service extension.

The linear-response theorem checks out: the omitted Q is PSD and satisfies
Q <= tr(Q) I = beta I. Hence the shifted proposal Slin+beta I is PSD and,
with response feature error delta, its true metric discrepancy lies in
[-(beta+delta)I, delta I]. The negative/positive endpoint directions are correct.
The group replay SPD invariant and monotone uncertainty endpoints hold with
fixed prefix/chart, while candidate margins need not improve monotonically.
The quadratic radius inequalities L17-L18 and exact 253/492 two-dimensional
information-loss example were checked independently. The smaller representation
does not contradict the earlier full polynomial-Gram query lower bound because
it computes an enclosure and may abstain rather than answering that full query.

The compact index computes exact constant/first matrices, scalar tangent Gram,
beta and full-response trace. Its unshifted lower bound is
max(Gershgorin, lambda-beta), and the shifted bound strengthens this to
max(lambda, unshifted_lower+beta). These are sound under intrinsic moment
provenance. Exact raw proposal reconstruction multiplies by M0 after subtracting
ridge and adding normalized beta I, so no normalization is duplicated.

SignedGramBound requires two nonnegative exact raw error radii. The service
sums each side separately, divides by fixed normalization and ridge, and
derives a=1-negative/(M0*lambda), b=1+positive/(M0*lambda). Each replay replaces
the actual proposal and removes its two radii. The newly added independent
test_signed_raw_radius_is_normalized_exactly_once uses M0=1/4: failing to
normalize its one-sided PSD bound would falsely accept codes (0,0), whereas
the actual target is (0,1). The current implementation correctly replays and
matches the target. Malformed negative/floating signed radii are also rejected.
All 10 reviewer-owned tests pass under package invocation after adding relative
import fallbacks for compatibility with both unittest discover and package mode.

Both service adapter tiers bind the composite reference, new certified prefix,
group membership, basis identities, raw source digest, coefficient count and
configured coefficient-ball domain. The coefficient decomposition, residual
norm and descriptor semantic truth remain declared trusted proof obligations.
The quadratic adapter contracts at normalization 1 and returns a raw absolute
bound. The linear adapter also contracts at normalization 1 and returns raw
signed radii beta+delta and delta. The engine applies the actual M0 exactly
once. The helper's relative acceptance result is not mistakenly used as a
certificate under that temporary normalization.

An additional completeness issue was found and resolved: a legitimate
intrinsic_moments=None response originally kept an untyped base descriptor;
the configured provider then rejected it as malformed evidence instead of
replaying. Both wrappers now emit a canonical unavailable-response marker
containing its tier and base descriptor. Providers return UNKNOWN for a valid
marker and reject malformed/noncanonical markers. The author is adding its
regression tests; the source fix has been reviewed. This was a fallback
completeness defect, not a false-acceptance defect.

Two important implementation distinctions remain. First, the adapters retain
per-record moment payloads and rebuild group sums, so they still read O(N)
stored descriptors; they do not implement the aggregate-only index's online
record-count-independent query cost. Second, the response-moments section 16
no-replay corollary uses the sharper theoretical whitened transport route.
The current absolute/signed-radii service may conservatively replay even when
that theoretical inequality holds. This distinction was reported to the theory
author and root. Neither affects exactness, but both limit performance claims.
