V44: NEW ONE-USE EXPOSED-ARTICLE QUALITY DIAGNOSTIC

This is a prospective development diagnostic, not new confirmation. Do not run,
register, or submit it until both actual V43 model/state byte audits have passed.
No V43 source, historical worker, registration, or ledger may be rewritten.

Registration binds the completed V43 program, source inventory and settled ledger,
the frozen and additive byte audits, actual compressed step-2 model/state and its
completion, the immutable V30 eight-article registration and historical losses,
all sixty quality exclusions, checkpoint files, every current research/source
Python file, this protocol, and the actual CPU software/numerical runtime.

Inputs are exactly the eight exposed V30 validation articles, each with its
already registered 128-token sequence. No tokenizer, corpus download, pool
selection, reserve, new article, or held-out model result is needed. Preserve all
sixty historical exclusions. Each model has 1,016 next-token predictions.

The actual V43 final compressed successor supplies all 42,467,328 four-bit codes
in all 24 affine stages. Its model export must equal the state's packed arrays.
The fixed checkpoint, row grids, ridge 1/100, original normalization 96, final
32 retained calibration tokens, and exact finite decoder remain unchanged.
Construct a fresh matched sequential comparator from that same final record,
feeding each calibrated output into the next stage. Its target differs only in
calibration features; its timing is not a fixed-target repair baseline. The
existing ordered constructor's pure helper uses the same certified point token
kernel, bounded 16-coordinate refinement, 8 GiB array policy, 64 billion stage
and one trillion complete request structural allowance. It admits every stage
before calibration feature extraction and has no exact-rational rescue.

Use the unchanged NumpyQualityDecoder and nll_from_logits for all four models:
full_precision, nearest_rounding, fixed_feature, sequential. Likelihoods use
ordinary NumPy binary64 BLAS/nonlinear arithmetic and are not certified finite
inference. No GPU equivalence is assumed. Full precision retains the original
checkpoint matrices; nearest rounding uses the same base-only four-bit grids.
The pinned checkpoint uses gelu_new, implemented by NumPy tanh. SciPy is only
needed by the evaluator's unused gelu branch; its absence is recorded explicitly
in the runtime identity, while missing required or broken packages still refuse.
Registration checks the pinned gelu_new activation. Registration software job
13211 failed on an unconditional SciPy import before any quality worker or ledger
was created; dependent job 13212 never ran. Preserve those logs and source 38ff2ae.
The correction changes dependency fingerprinting, not evaluation or thresholds;
use a fresh registration directory after its software check passes.

Evaluate full precision and nearest on all eight exposed articles first, with
alternating two-model order. Compare all sixteen losses with the old V30 receipt
at absolute mean-NLL tolerance 1e-8. Any larger deviation refuses the diagnostic
before constructing/evaluating the two new calibrated models. Their order then
alternates fixed/sequential by article. Report every loss and prediction count.

Freeze two descriptive development guards: pooled fixed/sequential perplexity
ratio <= 1.05 and every article fixed/sequential ratio <= 1.20. Pooled ratios are
exp(sum paired NLL differences / 1016), not means of article perplexities.
Also report fixed/nearest and fixed/full-precision ratios and all per-article
outcomes. A guard failure is a valid adverse result. No inferential intervals.
Perplexity overflow is reported as null with its log value retained; guards use
the equivalent log thresholds so extreme adverse results do not become retries.
No retuning, model promotion, population claim, or ACL-readiness claim is permitted.

One fresh PhaseBudget reserves 1,202 CPU seconds: one worker with soft CPU 1,200,
hard CPU 1,201 plus the controller's conservative second. Wall ceiling 1,500
seconds, one CPU affinity/thread, RLIMIT_AS and Slurm allocation 16 GiB, file
ceiling 2 GiB. These are abort ceilings, not a completion guarantee. All refusal,
failure, timeout and partial output costs remain charged; no automatic retries.
The controller writes the settled transaction even when the child fails. Final
worker writes and shutdown fall inside the controller transaction. No historical
allowance is reused. Ancillary audit/registration CPU is separately disclosed.

Historical guidance only: the earlier ordered sequential128 constructor used
137.84 CPU seconds and a six-model/eight-article evaluator used 51.99 CPU seconds
with 3.45 GB peak RSS on prior hardware. Retained32 is smaller, but different
hardware, cache state, certified arithmetic, or refusal can change its cost.

Commands (root operator only, after source review and both V43 byte audits):
python -B -m research_v44.campaign register NEW_DIRECTORY V43_DIRECTORY FIRST_AUDIT SECOND_AUDIT
python -B -m research_v44.campaign run NEW_DIRECTORY
